docs: curl tutorial (#1370)
feldera/feldera: docs/tutorials/rest_api/index.md

# Feldera: REST API

The Feldera platform features a comprehensive REST API which can be interacted

> with through a UI (the Web Console) or directly by calling the endpoints yourself.

Reviewer: I would be useful to hyperlink programs, connectors and pipelines terms to their definitions in `docs/`

calls can naturally be automated in your favorite scripting or programming
language (e.g., in Python using the `requests` module) as nearly all have
libraries to perform HTTP requests.

## Setup

1. **curl:** You must have **curl** installed. On some platforms it is already
   pre-installed, whereas on others you must install it yourself.

   > Throughout this tutorial we will use several curl options:
   > - `-i` shows the response headers
   > - `-X <METHOD>` specifies the request method (e.g., GET, PUT, POST, PATCH, DELETE, ...)
   > - `-N` disables output buffering
   > - `-H <HEADER>` specifies a request header

2. **Feldera platform:** This tutorial requires you to have a running Feldera platform.
   If you do not have one already, you can start one locally using
   [**docker**](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/):
   ```
   curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/feldera/feldera/main/deploy/docker-compose.yml | \
   docker compose -f - up
   ```
   (leave it running in a separate terminal while going through this tutorial)

   > For the remainder of this tutorial, we will use **http://localhost:8080** as

>    > this is the customary local hostname:port for test setups. You will need change

Author: Extra example URLs will be added in the next iteration

   > it to match the Feldera platform you are using.

3. **(Optional) API key:** Skip this step if you are using a local test setup
   using Docker as described above. If the Feldera platform requires authentication,
   you must generate an API key in the Web Console at the _Settings_ tab.
   You can add it to a `curl` call in the following way:
   ```
   curl -i -H "Authorization: <API-KEY>" -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/programs
   ```

   > For the remainder of this tutorial, you will need to add
   > `-H "Authorization: <API-KEY>"` to each of the calls.

4. **Check it's working:** You can verify it's working by running:
   ```
   curl -i -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/programs
   ```
   ... this should output `HTTP/1.1 200 OK` followed by some HTTP headers
   and finally below it the result: an JSON array of program objects, which
   when there are none (yet!) would be `[]`.

**Congratulations, you've already done your first direct API interaction!**

## Getting started

> In this tutorial, we are going to approach a use case of supply chain management.

Author: Updated to:

In this tutorial, we are going to approach a use case of supply chain management,
which we also looked at in the [UI-based tutorial](https://www.feldera.com/docs/tutorials/basics/).
The use case focuses on identifying the vendors with the lowest prices for parts.

It focuses on identifying the vendors with the lowest prices for parts.
We will create a pipeline which ingests data from several HTTP sources,

> perform several interesting queries on them, and read from the incremental views.

Author: Updated to:
"and performs several interesting queries on them."

We'll be going through the following steps:

1. Create and compile an SQL program
2. Create data connectors
3. Create a pipeline with the prepared program and connectors
4. Start the pipeline
5. Check pipeline progress
6. Read data directly from an incremental view
7. Feed data directly into a stream table
8. Cleanup

... all using just `curl`!

> Note: at any point in the tutorial, don't forget you can check out the
Web Console by visiting `http://localhost:8080` in your browser!

### Step 1: SQL program

The SQL program defines the input stream tables using `CREATE TABLE` statements
and incremental views using `CREATE VIEW` statements. We will create three tables,
namely `vendor`, `part`, and `price`. As views, we'll create `low_price` which lists
the lowest available price for each part across all vendors, and `preferred_vendor` which
supplements the lowest price by adding vendor information.

We create the program named `sc-program` as follows:

```
curl -i -X PUT http://localhost:8080/v0/programs/sc-program \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \

> -d "{

Reviewer 2: Can  we use `'` instead of `"` and have less escaping in the string?

Author: Unfortunately not, as then the string becomes literal and will include the newline characters, which the JSON parser does not accept in a string value. I changed the data input to a file which hopefully make it more readable.

    vendor BIGINT NOT NULL, \n\
    price DECIMAL \n\
); \n\
\n\
-- Incremental views -- \n\
\n\
CREATE VIEW low_price (part, price) AS \n\
SELECT \n\
   price.part AS part, \n\
   MIN(price.price) AS price \n\
FROM price \n\
GROUP BY price.part; \n\
\n\
CREATE VIEW preferred_vendor (part_id, part_name, vendor_id, vendor_name, price) AS \n\
SELECT \n\
    part.id AS part_id, \n\
    part.name AS part_name, \n\
    vendor.id AS vendor_id, \n\
    vendor.name AS vendor_name, \n\
    price.price AS price \n\
FROM \n\
    price, part, vendor, low_price \n\
WHERE \n\
   price.price = low_price.price AND \n\
   price.part = low_price.part AND \n\
   part.id = price.part AND \n\
   vendor.id = price.vendor;\"
}"
```

(The many escape characters in the command are to both have the SQL readable enough
and be correct JSON simultaneously.)

As response, we should get back `HTTP/1.1 201 Created` along with
the identifier of the program and its version (1).
When an SQL program is created or when its code is updated, its version is incremented
and compilation is automatically triggered.

Check that the program is compiled:

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/programs/sc-program
```

> ... which will have `status` set to `Success` when compilation is done.

Author: I'm more in favor of keeping it curl-only, as to not require the reader to change context. There is already a note to mention to check out the Web Console during the tutorial earlier on:

```
Note: at any point in the tutorial, don't forget you can check out the Web Console by visiting http://localhost:8080/ in your browser!
```

### Step 2: Data connectors

> Data connectors are used to both input data sources into stream tables,

Reviewer 2: I don't think we use the term "stream tables". Let's refer to them as just "tables".

        "transport": {
            "name": "url",
            "config": {
                "path": "https://feldera-basics-tutorial.s3.amazonaws.com/vendor.json"
            }
        },
        "format": {
            "name": "json",
            "config": {}
        }
    }
  }'
  ```

* **Price (named `sc-connector-price`):**
  ```
  curl -i -X PUT http://localhost:8080/v0/connectors/sc-connector-price \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "description": "Connector for price",
    "config": {
        "transport": {
            "name": "url",
            "config": {
                "path": "https://feldera-basics-tutorial.s3.amazonaws.com/price.json"
            }
        },
        "format": {
            "name": "json",
            "config": {}
        }
    }
  }'
  ```

Each of the above should return `HTTP/1.1 201 Created` when successful.

We can view the existing connectors using:

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/connectors
```

Because data sinks require write permission (rather than just read),
we do not create output connectors in this tutorial. However, the procedure
to do so is the same, albeit of course with its own specific configuration

> (e.g., providing output topic in a Kafka output connector config).

Reviewer 2: This paragraph isn't very helpful. Let's just say that we don't create sink connectors (and maybe refer to a section of the tutorial under construction) and that we are going to read outputs via the API instead.

Author: I changed it to a note:

```
> In this tutorial we do not create output connectors. We will read the
> views via the API (see step 6). The procedure to create output connectors
> is the same as for input connectors, albeit of course with its own
> specific configuration (e.g., providing output topic in a Kafka output
> connector config).
```

> Note: only when a pipeline is started, the connectors are actually used.
> A pipeline will not start if a connector is unable to connect to its
> data source or sink (e.g., if a URL is misspelled).

> To restart a pipeline (e.g., to have updates to its program or schema
> take effect):
> ```
> # Shut it down:
> curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/shutdown
> # ... wait for the current_status to become Shutdown by checking:
> curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline
> # ... and then start:
> curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/start
> ```

### Step 5: Pipeline progress

A running pipeline provides a multitude of interesting stats:

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/stats
```

... such as the number of input and processed records.
The `total_processed_records` should be `9` (3 rows each for part, vendor, and price).

### Step 6: Read data directly from an incremental view

Both input and output connectors are optional, in the sense that input and
output of data can directly be done using HTTP requests as well.

> We can retrieve the incremental view quantiles snapshot using `curl`:

Reviewer 2: Quantiles might be too much of an advanced topic for this tutorial.  They would require some more explanation.  Or I think it's ok to just skip them.

Author: I'm in favor of keeping it just because the ability to view a view via curl is I think important functionality to showcase. When the full snapshot retrieval is possible, we should update it.

# Feldera: REST API

> :::caution Experimental feature

Reviewer 3: Don't say "Experimental feature" here. I'd say it's a stable feature, just not with guaranteed backwards compatibility yet (because we're not yet v1).

```
The REST API is still evolving and might see backwards incompatible changes.
```

The API is under development and is not yet finalized.
The API will likely undergo significant changes in the future.

:::

The Feldera platform features a comprehensive REST API which can be interacted

> with through a UI (the Web Console) or directly by calling the endpoints yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with through Feldera's WebConsole UI or directly by calling the endpoints yourself.
```

> In this tutorial we will focus on the direct usage, and showcase this using

Author: Changed to:
In this tutorial we will focus on invoking the API endpoints directly via `curl`.

the well-known `curl` command. Of course, once you're familiar with the API

> (hopefully, after this tutorial!) and are programmatically inclined, these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these
```

> calls can naturally be automated in your favorite scripting or programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calls can be automated in your favorite scripting or programming
```

> language (e.g., in Python using the `requests` module) as nearly all have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
language (e.g., in Python using the `requests` module).
```

> libraries to perform HTTP requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Setup

> 1. **curl:** You must have **curl** installed. On some platforms it is already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **curl:** You must have **curl** installed.
```

>    pre-installed, whereas on others you must install it yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   > Throughout this tutorial we will use several curl options:
   > - `-i` shows the response headers
   > - `-X <METHOD>` specifies the request method (e.g., GET, PUT, POST, PATCH, DELETE, ...)
   > - `-N` disables output buffering
   > - `-H <HEADER>` specifies a request header

> 2. **Feldera platform:** This tutorial requires you to have a running Feldera platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Feldera platform:** This tutorial requires you to have a running Feldera instance to interact with.
```

   If you do not have one already, you can start one locally using
   [**docker**](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/):
   ```
   curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/feldera/feldera/main/deploy/docker-compose.yml | \
   docker compose -f - up
   ```
   (leave it running in a separate terminal while going through this tutorial)

   > For the remainder of this tutorial, we will use **http://localhost:8080** as

>    > this is the customary local hostname:port for test setups. You will need change

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > this is the default local hostname:port for the docker Feldera instance. You will need change
```

   ```
   curl -i -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/programs
   ```
   ... this should output `HTTP/1.1 200 OK` followed by some HTTP headers
   and finally below it the result: an JSON array of program objects, which
   when there are none (yet!) would be `[]`.

**Congratulations, you've already done your first direct API interaction!**

## Getting started

In this tutorial, we are going to approach a use case of supply chain management.
It focuses on identifying the vendors with the lowest prices for parts.
We will create a pipeline which ingests data from several HTTP sources,
perform several interesting queries on them, and read from the incremental views.

We'll be going through the following steps:

1. Create and compile an SQL program
2. Create data connectors
3. Create a pipeline with the prepared program and connectors
4. Start the pipeline
5. Check pipeline progress
6. Read data directly from an incremental view
7. Feed data directly into a stream table
8. Cleanup

... all using just `curl`!

> Note: at any point in the tutorial, don't forget you can check out the
Web Console by visiting `http://localhost:8080` in your browser!

### Step 1: SQL program

> The SQL program defines the input stream tables using `CREATE TABLE` statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SQL program defines the input tables using `CREATE TABLE` statements
```

> and incremental views using `CREATE VIEW` statements. We will create three tables,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and views using `CREATE VIEW` statements. We will create three tables,
```

namely `vendor`, `part`, and `price`. As views, we'll create `low_price` which lists
the lowest available price for each part across all vendors, and `preferred_vendor` which
supplements the lowest price by adding vendor information.

We create the program named `sc-program` as follows:

```

> curl -i -X PUT http://localhost:8080/v0/programs/sc-program \

Reviewer 3: Let's avoid this much use of escape characters. Either use single quotes. Or create a file with the body and then use `--data @path-to-file`.

Author: Single quotes unfortunately do not work as then the newlines characters become literal, and the JSON parser does not accept multiline strings. I changed it to input a data file as you suggested, with the minimum amount of newlines I could manage and nicest layout. I don't know how to improve it further, any thoughts are very welcome :)

Author: Can be improved in a next iteration

-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-d "{

>     \"description\": \"Supply Chain program\",

Reviewer: This json is hard to read including CRLF. Lets have a file or code in this markup doc that the user can copy+paste.

Author: Updated it to retrieve the JSON data from file -- see my comment at Lalith's review comment.

    \"code\": \" \
-- Stream tables -- \n\
\n\
CREATE TABLE vendor ( \n\
    id BIGINT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY, \n\
    name VARCHAR, \n\
    address VARCHAR \n\
); \n\
\n\
CREATE TABLE part ( \n\
    id bigint NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY, \n\
    name VARCHAR \n\
); \n\
\n\
CREATE TABLE price ( \n\
    part BIGINT NOT NULL, \n\
    vendor BIGINT NOT NULL, \n\
    price DECIMAL \n\
); \n\
\n\
-- Incremental views -- \n\
\n\
CREATE VIEW low_price (part, price) AS \n\
SELECT \n\
   price.part AS part, \n\
   MIN(price.price) AS price \n\
FROM price \n\
GROUP BY price.part; \n\
\n\
CREATE VIEW preferred_vendor (part_id, part_name, vendor_id, vendor_name, price) AS \n\
SELECT \n\
    part.id AS part_id, \n\
    part.name AS part_name, \n\
    vendor.id AS vendor_id, \n\
    vendor.name AS vendor_name, \n\
    price.price AS price \n\
FROM \n\
    price, part, vendor, low_price \n\
WHERE \n\
   price.price = low_price.price AND \n\
   price.part = low_price.part AND \n\
   part.id = price.part AND \n\
   vendor.id = price.vendor;\"
}"
```

(The many escape characters in the command are to both have the SQL readable enough
and be correct JSON simultaneously.)

> As response, we should get back `HTTP/1.1 201 Created` along with

Reviewer: Lets show actual output of running the curl.

Author: For most of the GET requests I added a shortened response example showing only the most relevant properties.

the identifier of the program and its version (1).
When an SQL program is created or when its code is updated, its version is incremented
and compilation is automatically triggered.

Check that the program is compiled:

```
curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/programs/sc-program
```

... which will have `status` set to `Success` when compilation is done.

### Step 2: Data connectors

Data connectors are used to both input data sources into stream tables,

> and output data from incremental views to data sinks. In this tutorial,

Reviewer: We should just say views not incremental views in the doc. It's important to use the same consistent terms that are used elsewhere in docs, blogs etc.

Author: Updated "stream table" to "table" and "incremental view" to "view" in all places. Also removed the "input"/"output" as adjective to them respectively.

we will define an HTTP source for each of the input stream tables:

* **Part (named `sc-connector-part`):**
  ```
  curl -i -X PUT http://localhost:8080/v0/connectors/sc-connector-part \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "description": "Connector for part",
    "config": {
        "transport": {
            "name": "url",
            "config": {

>                 "path": "https://feldera-basics-tutorial.s3.amazonaws.com/part.json"

Reviewer 4: Do we pay amazon every time someone reads this file?

(e.g., providing output topic in a Kafka output connector config).

### Step 3: Pipeline creation

We create the pipeline referring by name to the program and all
the connectors we have created previously. Each connector is
attached as input to their respective stream table.

```
curl -i -X PUT http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline \
-H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
-d '{
    "description": "Supply Chain pipeline",
    "program_name": "sc-program",
    "config": {"workers": 4},
    "connectors": [
         {
             "connector_name": "sc-connector-part",
             "is_input": true,
             "name": "sc-connector-part",
             "relation_name": "PART"
         },
         {
             "connector_name": "sc-connector-vendor",
             "is_input": true,
             "name": "sc-connector-vendor",
             "relation_name": "VENDOR"
         },
         {
             "connector_name": "sc-connector-price",
             "is_input": true,
             "name": "sc-connector-price",
             "relation_name": "PRICE"
         }
    ]
}'
```

> Observe in the above format that it is possible to connect multiple

> > connectors to the same stream table or incremental view.

Reviewer 4: table, no "stream" here too

Author: Also "incremental view" -> "view"

curl -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/stats
```

... such as the number of input and processed records.
The `total_processed_records` should be `9` (3 rows each for part, vendor, and price).

### Step 6: Read data directly from an incremental view

Both input and output connectors are optional, in the sense that input and
output of data can directly be done using HTTP requests as well.

We can retrieve the incremental view quantiles snapshot using `curl`:

```
curl -X POST 'http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/egress/PREFERRED_VENDOR?format=json&mode=snapshot&query=quantiles'
```

... which for each of the parts will show the preferred vendor.

This includes Gravitech Dynamics (vendor id: 1) for the Warp Core (part id: 2)
at a price point of 15000.

It is also possible to actively monitor an incremental view for changes
rather than retrieving a snapshot:

```
curl -N -X POST 'http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/egress/PREFERRED_VENDOR?format=json&mode=watch'
```

Keep this open in a separate terminal for the next step.
Even if there is no changes it will regularly send an empty message.

### Step 7: Feed data directly into a stream table

> It is possible to directly feed data into a stream table. In this case,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to INSERT or UPSERT a single row into any table. In this case,
```

Reviewer 3: `INSERT, UPSERT or even DELETE a single row within a table.`

we have HyperDrive Innovations supply the Warp Core at a lower price of 12000:

```
curl -X 'POST' http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/ingress/PRICE?format=json \
-d '{"insert": {"part": 2, "vendor": 2, "price": 12000}}'
```

> Now we can check in the watch terminal that indeed the preferred vendor is changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the other terminal, we can see preferred vendor view output change,
```

Author: Changed to:

In the other terminal, we can see the preferred vendor view output change, with a row deletion (with the previous cheapest vendor) and insertion (with the new cheapest vendor).

by a row deletion (with the previous cheapest vendor) and insertion
(with the new cheapest vendor).

### Step 8: Cleanup

After done with the tutorial, we can clean up. We first shut down the pipeline:

```
curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline/shutdown
```

Check it is shut down using:

```
curl -i -X GET http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline
```
... which should have `current_status` set to `Shutdown`.

Next, all resources can be deleted in reverse order of creation:
```
curl -i -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/v0/pipelines/sc-pipeline
curl -i -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/v0/connectors/sc-connector-part
curl -i -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/v0/connectors/sc-connector-vendor
curl -i -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/v0/connectors/sc-connector-price
curl -i -X DELETE http://localhost:8080/v0/programs/sc-program
```

> If you are using the docker test setup, you can stop the Feldera platform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using the docker test setup, you can stop the Feldera docker instance
```

using Ctrl-C. This should shut down the containers. This generally works,
although sometimes docker fails to shut down the containers and leaves
them running in the background. In this case, you can also explicitly
shut them down using `docker compose down`:

```
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/feldera/feldera/main/deploy/docker-compose.yml | \
docker compose -f - down
```

## Next steps

> If this tutorial has piqued your interest, consider the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you found this interesting. Please consider reading additional information at:
```
